cardinality |__def-ans__|the number of objects on each side of the relationship|__card__|modality |__def-ans__|if the relationship is required (1) or not (optional (0))|__card__|LEFT JOIN |__def-ans__|returns all connected rows, as well as unconnected rows from the LEFT table (per the ON clause condition)|__card__|RIGHT OUTER |__def-ans__|Use when we want to get all values from RIGHT table (even if there are no matching rows in the table it is being joined with!)|__card__|update anomaly |__def-ans__|occurs when a database schema allows for more than one answer (returned data) to a given question (select query)|__card__|insertion anomaly |__def-ans__||__card__|deletion anomaly |__def-ans__||__card__|Do Foreign Keys receive a NOT NULL constraint automatically? |__def-ans__|No. If we desire our foreign key to have a NOT NULL constraint, we must specify so either at the time of definition or after (via altering).|__card__|Imagine we have a table containing some decimal values. We then adjust the data type of the column containing these decimals to an integer. We then immediately change the datatype back to a decimal. Will the above changes to the schema permanently impact the data contained in the table? |__def-ans__|Yes, upon inspection, all of the once decimal values are now integers. This change is irreversible, so be careful!!|__card__|What is the mechanism by which constraints enforce uniqueness? |__def-ans__|indices!|__card__|Describe the general sequence of statements/clauses that comprise a query's order of execution. |__def-ans__||__card__|Can you reference aliases in the ORDER BY clause? |__def-ans__|yes, because all the expressions specified in the SELECT clause have been computed at this stage.|__card__|What is a benefit of the more verbose form of writing INSERT INTO statements (the ones which specify the column names immediately following the table name -> (col_1, col_2,...) ? |__def-ans__|These are forward compatible, meaning that if we were to modify a schema and add a column with a default value, we wouldn't need to modify our previous statements. Whereas, the non-verbosely written statements (which don't specify column names) will have to be rewritten.|__card__|When UPDATE-ing the data stored in a table, what's a |__def-ans__||__card__|When UPDATE-ing a table's contents, what will occur if the WHERE clause is left off of the statement? What condition-testing strategy can we employ to avoid this undesirable outcome? |__def-ans__|The values of all records (rows) in the table which match the specified columns will be updated (since there's no condition to filter the individual records in the specified column).|__card__|Can you describe the relationship between DDL and DML statements? Specifically, how does the one influence the other as it pertains to the creation, reading, updating, and deleting of data? |__def-ans__||__card__|What is the general use case for a subquery? When might a subquery be favorable to a join? |__def-ans__|An appropriate situation is one in which data is being returned from one table that relies on some kind of conditional expression that utilizes data from another table, but no data from that second table actually needs to be included in the result set.|__card__|What is the minimum number of tables required to implement a many-to-many relationship between two entities? |__def-ans__|A minimum of three tables; two entities themselves and a join table, which serves to represent the relationship and holds two foreign keys (which reference the primary keys of the relations)|__card__|Name two situations where we might use the `SET` clause. |__def-ans__|one situation is in conjunction with `ALTER TABLE ALTER COLUMN` when we want to `SET` the accepted datatype of a column to `NOT NULL`.

another is in conjunction with the `UPDATE` clause where we would `SET` some column to a specific value `WHERE` some condition applies.|__card__|Suppose we attempt to insert a row into a table. One of the values of this inserted record violates a constraint. Does the serial increment for a failed insert? |__def-ans__|Yes.|__card__|what is an rdbms? |__def-ans__|a software application or system which allows a user, or application, to interact with a relational database by issuing commands using syntax that conforms to a certain set of conventions or standards (ex: IBM, Oracle, MySQL, Microsoft SQLServer and PostgreSQL)|__card__|Can one add `ON DELETE CASCADE` to an existing foreign key constraint? |__def-ans__|No. We must first drop the existing foreign key constraint, then add it back with the desired provision.|__card__|define scalar subquery, provide an example. use case? |__def-ans__||__card__|What is the difference between table constraints and column constraints? Provide examples of both. |__def-ans__||__card__|Define primary key. Explain its role in the context of preserving data integrity. |__def-ans__|primary keys uniquely identify records (data entries) in a table. They must be unique, never null, and must never change. Pkeys help to preserve integrity of data through the aforementioned attributes.

An entity has but one primary key.|__card__|What is a foreign key? |__def-ans__|A Fkey is a reference to a pre-existing primary key located in a different entity (table). Put another way, a Fkey is another table's primary key located in a foreign table.

Fkeys DON'T have to be unique; a customer (with an id) can have many orders, and their id will likely be recorded many times in the orders table (as a fkey) thus the customer's fkey value is NOT unique in that table's fcolumn.

There can also be multiple fkey columns in one entity (table). An orders table likely has a customer_id, item_id, etc_id as attributes, all of which would be fkeys referencing the pkeys of various different entities.

Foreign key + primary key allows us to normalize data within a table, i.e. ensure that its referential integrity is preserved. Referential integrity promises us that table relationships remain consistent, and that the rules surrounding whatever kind of relationship we have defined will be enforced.|__card__|Under what conditions can a check constraint be satisfied? |__def-ans__|1. if the conditional statement evaluates true or null. If any of the operands (elements in the conditional statement) are null, it's likely that the entire expression evaluates to null. This outcome can be avoided by implementing not null constraints in your tables.|__card__|Is it possible to implement not null table constraints? |__def-ans__||__card__|one-to-many relationship |__def-ans__|A relationship between two entities in which one record in the primary table can match many (zero, one, or many) records in the related table|__card__|what's an schema-level indication that a one-to-one relationship exists between two entities? |__def-ans__|When table_2's primary key is also a foreign key referencing the primary key of table_1.|__card__|